---
layout: post
title: "Tiny Hacker House Design Part I: Overview"
comments: true
date: 2014-10-22
tags: tiny hacker house design overview
---

My <a href="{% post_url 2014-08-04-i'm-building-a-tiny-hacker-house %}">last
post</a> provided some of the basic philosophical reasoning behind my journey
to build a tiny hacker house. It also featured a rough model of the house at a
very early stage in its conception. Well, after a couple more months of
research and a dash of Burningman inspiration, I've completed what I consider
to be the beta version of the design.

<!-- break -->

<center> <img src="/img/overview-right.png" alt="Overview Right"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Enough hacker space to squeeze in 3 or 4 curious nomads.
</i> </div> </center>

### Design Goals

Although it's on a 16' trailer, I want my house to be practical enough to
comfortably shelter 4 adults for weekend ski trips, tiny dinner parties, and
the occasional road trip or two. I also want to be fairly independent of
grid-tied scenarios; I suspect I'll be dancing around from place to place as I
navigate the legal contours of living in a tiny house in greater San Francisco.
As a result, my soft goal for the house is to support a decent living without
resupplies for 4 person-weeks. That means electricity, showering, dishes,
drinking water, food, and propane for 1 person for 4 weeks, or 4 people for 1
week.

I believe one of the primary reasons folks get hassled for living full-time in
RVs is because they are, for the most part, unsightly. Airstreams are beautiful
feats of engineering, but even they don't blend in well as a full-time dwelling
in an urban or suburban environment. I was originally planning to use a
maintenance-free material for the exterior siding such as corrugated aluminum
or [Corten RustWall
panels](http://www.cortenroofing.com/rustwall-reg-panel_8_1160_30805.html), but
I've decided to stick with the standard cedar planks. The less my house stands
out, the easier it'll be to find permanent parking.

Since I make my living on my computer, I want to be able to work comfortably
anytime, anywhere. The electrical system will need to power a laptop, a few
lights, and internet equipment for up to 12 hours, in the case of a winter
all-nighter. It will also need to handle power spikes of a few hours at a time,
such as running toaster oven, lights, range fan, and A/C simultaneously.

I also want to be able to maintain a comfortable 68 - 78&#176;F whether I'm in
Austin for the summer or Colorado for the winter. Closed-cell spray foam
insulation seems to be the most practical solution here, if a bit pricey. Along
with rigid foam insulation, a radiant heat barrier, and the interior / exterior
siding, I'm looking at an insulating R-value in the mid 30's. An 8,000 BTU
window air conditioner should cool the 100 sq ft nicely.

For heating, I've seen a lot of folks go with [Dickinson
Marine](http://dickinsonmarine.com/propane.php)'s propane fireplace, but I
wanted something that provides more ambient heat as opposed to a single
point-source of toasty air. Because if your toes are cold, it doesn't matter
how warm the rest of you is -- you're still cold. So I'm planning to integrate
a closed-loop solar in-floor heating system.

I spent a couple days crunching numbers trying to size the system, but it's
difficult given the amount of thermal variables in a mobile tiny house. I plan
to use 4 solar heating panels on the roof, anti-freeze coolant,
variable-voltage DC pump, and PEX tubing snaked under the hardwood floor boards
to heat my home. I can adjust the amount of heat exchanged into the home by
dialing up or down the speed of the pump. Frigid nights will prove challenging,
however -- an insulated coolant storage tank may be necessary to collect the
day's heat. If all else fails, I can always light the oven to double as a
makeshift fireplace.

### Towing

Physics dictates that you'll need a truck or SUV to safely tow a tiny house at
highway speeds. Heavy duty trucks work best due to their weight, braking
system, and long wheelbase. Most wood-framed tiny houses seem to come in at a
dry weight of 4,000 - 7,000 lb, but mine will be substantially heavier at a
maximum 11,000 lb due to its beefier construction and off-grid goodies. That
significantly narrows my choices available for tow vehicles -- most SUVs are
limited to 8,000 lb and even full-size trucks won't cut it with a maximum
towing capacity of about 10,000 lb. Because of this, I chose a Chevy 2500 HD
with a maximum towing capacity of 14,500 lb. Its price, lengthy wheelbase, 7500
lb curb weight, and single rear wheel make for the best combination of features
given my budget.
 
<center>
  <img src="/img/overview.png" alt="Overview">
  <div class="caption">
    <i>
My tow vehicle is a 3/4 ton Chevy truck. Ironically, it's longer than my house.
    </i>
  </div>
</center>

The front axle of my tandem-axle trailer almost perfectly bisects the house
foundation, making it straightforward to estimate the weight distribution to
achieve a desired tongue weight of 10-15% total trailer weight. The heaviest
items will be located low and towards the front of the house, so I chose a
wedge shape for the frame to balance the batteries, water tanks, etc that will
sit close to the tongue. A tongue-supported storage shed and rear hitch-mounted
luggage tray will provide flexibility for fine-tuning the weight distribution.

Knowing the estimated dry weight of my house, I can roughly calculate the
forces involved in an emergency maneuver such as coming to screeching stop.
According to
[MotorTrend](http://www.trucktrend.com/roadtests/pickup/163_1402_2015_chevrolet_silverado_2500_hd_ltz_4x4_first_test/?__federated=1),
my truck has a 60 to 0 mph stopping distance of 134 ft. That translates to
about 1 G-force, and will be less when fully loaded and towing. So the total
lateral shear force acting between the house and the trailer could be up to
10,000 lbs, or 5 tons. I'll probably want to use high-grade bolts to attach the
subfloor and reinforce the corners of the frame with angle iron.

### Framing

If I'm going to do all the work to build a tiny house, I want the full
experience of architecting it too. I didn't realize, however, how much tedious
work is involved just to get an accurate model finished. I've been researching
and working on it for the past 4 months part-time, and just now getting to the
point where I feel comfortable ordering materials. If you haven't noticed
already, I'm using the fantastic and free [Sketchup
Make](http://www.sketchup.com/products/sketchup-make) to draw these up.

<center> <img src="/img/overview-frame.png" alt="Overview Frame"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Measure twice, cut once. Accurately precut frame members
will save me time.  </i> </div> </center>

I've decided to go with 12-gauge steel studs fastened with pan head screws and
welded together at the joints. I've also chosen the more rust-resistant G90
galvanization in case I decide to live in humid or coastal climates. That puts
the total weight of the frame at around 3000 lbs. It's heavy, but without a
solid frame, I'm worried the rest of the house could literally fall apart after
a few years of highway jostle. And, I can always peel back and replace siding
and sheathing but replacing a frame stud after it's been welded and sealed in
with spray foam would be a nightmare.

Local drywall supply stores usually have access to light gauge metal studs in
various sizes and types from the manufacturer, and can have them ready for you
in a few business days' notice. Most will even precut them for free if you give
them the desired lengths. Ideally, you could send them a list of the exact
members you need and simply assemble them like Legos, no cutting necessary.

I've reinforced points where the frame needs to remain perfectly aligned or
where I anticipate flex. This will keep the door hinging smoothly, and
hopefully prevent any gaps or creaks from developing in the siding and floor
boards.

### Layout

The kitchen consumes the whole forward bit of the trailer, and features 18"
deep counter tops. I like to cook, and I didn't want my transition to a tiny
life to undermine that. The sink is 18" x 16" x 8" inches deep -- large enough
to hold water for mopping the floors and washing large kitchenware. I've yet to
find a decent propane-powered stove / oven however. Most seem to be built for
either restaurants or camping. This [Camp Chef outdoor
oven](http://amzn.com/B0013LLSZG) comes close, but it's lacking a broil option
and automatic thermostat.

<center> <img src="/img/overview-top.png" alt="Overview Top"> <div
class="caption"> <i> From left to right: kitchen, living room, bathroom. Not
pictured: loft.  </i> </div> </center>

The living room / office / dining room is the most configurable area of the
house. The large table and futon fold against the wall to provide a large, open
area for a yoga session or slumber party. The energy-efficient chest-style
refrigerator, located to the right of the futon, provides extra lounging space.
The [Seiki 39" TV /
Monitor](http://www.seiki.com/products/tv/SE39UY04-detail.php) is mounted on an
extending arm, functioning as a TV when against the wall and a computer monitor
when extended towards the futon.

Most tiny houses sacrifice bathroom space for extra living and cooking space.
While that seems to make sense at first, when you consider that showering,
shaving, dressing, and using the toilet are activities that are best performed
in the comfort of <i>your own</i> private space, I realized I wanted a
generously-sized bathroom. I can use the extra room as a clothes closet, and do
laundry in the shower pan.

That just about summarizes the design of the tiny hacker house. The next post
will detail the electrical system!

{% include all_design_posts.markdown %}
